Modernize random number generator setup (#1549)
nest/nest-simulator: doc/guides/random_numbers.rst

better performance. More generators may be added in the future. Currently, only a small number of
generators is available because we require generators with sufficiently long period as discussed in
:ref:`Random number internals <random_internals>`.

The default random number generator set in NEST 3 is ``mt19937_64``. To choose a different generator,
simply set it

::

     nest.SetKernelStatus({'rng_type': 'Philox_32'})

It is a good idea to cross-check your simulation results using a different random number generator
type. Even though generators and our understanding of them has become much better in recent years,
there always remains a risk of RNG artifacts affecting simulations.

Seeding the random number generator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

NEST uses a built-in default seed if you do not specify one. This means that unless you explicitly
set the seed, all simulations will be run with the same sequence of random numbers. So *do not forget
too seed your simulations*!

You can use any number :math:`s` with :math:`1\leq s \leq 2^{31}-1` as seed:

::

    nest.SetKernelStatus({'rng_seed': 12345})

> As long as you use two different seed values, NEST will ensure that all random number streams in a

Author: I think (correct me if I'm wrong, @heplesser) the intention is to say that different values for `s` will give different random numbers for all threads and processes. This is different from the old setup where every thread on every process needed it's own explicit seed.

> As long as you use two different seed values, NEST will ensure that all random number streams in a

Reviewer: @jessica-mitchell @hakonsbm I think the "two" here made the sentence confusing. What I really meant to say was that as long as you do not use the same seed over again, you will get different random streams. So it should probably just be
```suggestion
As long as you use different seed values, NEST will ensure that all random number streams in a
```

In rare occasions, the capabilities provided by NEST for parameterizing your network will
not cover your needs and require additional randomization at the Python level. This requires
some additional consideration when performing simulations in parallel, especially when using
MPI parallelization. You may want to consult the section on :ref:`Random number internals <random_internals>`
before continuing.

A key principle of parallel simulation in NEST is that a simulation performed with a fixed
number of virtual processes :math:`N_{\text{vp}} = M \times T` shall produce identical results
independent of between how many MPI processes :math:`M` and threads :math:`T` the virtual processes are
divided. To observe this principle also when randomizing from the Python level, it is essential
to create one Python random number generator per virtual process and use the random number
generator for the virtual process to which a node belongs (for synapses: the VP of the target
node).

We consider first an example setting a random membrane potential.
We use the `modern random package introduced with NumPy 1.17 <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/>`__.

> .. admonition:: Don't do this in Python!

Author: Looks like it is an example of how one can use custom randomization from the Python level, but with an example where it is better to use the built-in NEST randomization (@heplesser?). The admonition could probably be rephrased to show this clearer.

> .. admonition:: Don't do this in Python!

Reviewer: I tried to improve on the text and sent @hakonsbm a PR for it.

    import numpy as np

    n_vp = 4
    py_seed = 987654

    nest.SetKernelStatus({'total_num_virtual_procs': n_vp})
    nrns = nest.Create('iaf_psc_alpha', 12)

    rngs = {vp: np.random.default_rng(py_seed+vp) for vp in nest.GetLocalVPs()}

    for n in nest.GetLocalNodeCollection(nrns):
        n.set({'V_m': rngs[n.get('vp')].uniform()})

After creating the neurons, we create ``n_vp`` random number generators. We then use
``nest.GetLocalNodeCollection()`` to obtain all those neurons that belong to the local
MPI rank, since each rank can only access local nodes. We then use ``n.get('vp')`` to obtain
the virtual processes responsible for the node and use it to pick out the correct RNG,
from which we draw the random membrane potential.

To parameterize a connection, we need to use the random generator for the virtual process of
the target neuron. Continuing from the example above, we can randomize the connection weight
as follows:

.. code-block:: ipython

    nest.Connect(nrns, nrns, 'one_to_one')

    for c in nest.GetConnections():
        c.set({'weight': rngs[c.get('vp')].uniform()})

.. _random_internals:

Random number internals
-----------------------

> Global and VP-local generators

Author: Yes, VP stands for virtual process. This should probably be stated.

> Global and VP-local generators

Reviewer: @hakonsbm Could you fix this (saves me a PR towards you)?

> Global and VP-local generators

Reviewer: I included a fix for this in the PR with the improved "don't do this" text.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As described above, random numbers are consumed in NEST

1. during node creation to randomize node parameters;

#. during connection creation

   a. to select connections to be created,
   #. to parameterize connections;

#. during simulation

   a. to generate stochastic input (randomized spike trains, noisy currents),
   #. to support stochastic spike generation.

In all cases except certain sub-cases of 2.a, randomization is tied to a node,
which in turn is assigned to a specific virtual process, either because the node is
concerned (cases 1, 3) or because the node is the target of a connection
(case 2). NEST design guarantees that nodes assigned to different VPs
can be updated independently of each other, and the same holds for
connections if created or parameterized from a target-node perspective.
Therefore, for all these purposes, one random number stream per VP is
required and sufficient to ensure that different VPs can operate
independently.

> The only exception are certain sub-cases of 2.i and 3 which require

Author: Yes. What should it be here, @heplesser?

> The only exception are certain sub-cases of 2.i and 3 which require

Reviewer: 2.a is right here.

identical random number streams either per MPI process or per virtual process.
This pertains in particular to ``fixed_outdegree`` and ``fixed_total_number``
connection rules and the `mip_generator`.

NEST therefore provides three kinds of random number streams

1. a rank-synchronized (global) random number stream to be used only by the
   main thread of each MPI rank; all MPI ranks must draw equally many numbers
   from this stream and discard those they do not need.
#. a VP-synchronized (global) random number stream to be used in parallel
   by all VPs.
#. one asynchronous random number stream per virtual process.

This results in a total of :math:`N_{\text{vp}}+2` random number streams.
To avoid unnecessary complications in the code using random numbers,
serial simulations also use all three kinds. The generators for all streams
are of the same type. If the RNG type is changed, the change
applies to all generators.

NEST regularly checks during a simulation that the rank- and VP-synchronized
random number streams indeed stay in sync.

Quantity of random numbers required
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> With a view to future exascale computers, we need to prepare for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Considering the future with exascale computers, we need to prepare for
```

recent account of random number generation in highly parallel settings.
The main approach to providing independent random number streams in
parallel simulations is to use a high-quality random number generator
with long period and to seed it with a different seed for each stream. They
then argue that if we have :math:`s` streams of length :math:`l` and a generator
with period :math:`r`, the probability that two streams seeded with
different seeds will overlap is given by

.. math::

   p_{\text{overlap}} \sim s^2\frac{l}{r}\; .

We have

.. math ::

   s = N_{\text{vp}} = 10^7 \sim 2^{23}\quad\text{and}\quad l = 10^{11} \sim 2^{37}\;,

so assuming an RNG period of :math:`r = 2^{128}` we obtain

.. math ::

   p_{\text{overlap}} \sim \left(2^{23}\right)^2 \times 2^{37} / 2^{128} = 2^{-45} \sim 3 \times 10^{-14}

while for a period of :math:`r = 2^{256}` we obtain

.. math ::

   p_{\text{overlap}} \sim 2^{-173} \sim 10^{-52}\; .

The probability of stream collisions is thus negligibly small, provided
we use random number generators with a period of at least :math:`2^{128}`.

`L’Ecuyer (2012, Ch 3.6) <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21551-3_3>`__ points out

> that certain random number generators classes will show too much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that certain random number generator classes will show too much
```

regularity in their output if more than :math:`r^{1/3}` numbers are used (this
relation is based on exercises in Knuth, TAOCP vol 2, see `L’Ecuyer and
Simard (2001) <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4754(00)00253-6>`__). While
it is not certain that that analysis also applies to (short)
subsequences of the period of an RNG, one might still re-consider the

> analysis above, but using :math:`l^3 \sim 2^{111}` instead of :math:`l` when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analysis above, by using :math:`l^3 \sim 2^{111}` instead of :math:`l` when
```

computing :math:`p_{\text{overlap}}`. We then obtain

============================= ===============================
Period :math:`r`              :math:`p_{\text{overlap}}`
============================= ===============================
:math:`2^{128} \sim 10^{38}`  :math:`>> 1`
:math:`2^{256} \sim 10^{77}`  :math:`2^{-99} \sim 10^{-30}`
:math:`2^{512} \sim 10^{154}` :math:`2^{-355} \sim 10^{-107}`
============================= ===============================

Thus, for generators with periods of at least :math:`2^{256}`, we have
negligible collision probability also under this tightened criterium.

Among the generators offered by the C++ Standard Library, only the

> Mersenne Twister generator has sufficiently long period, so only this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mersenne Twister generator has a sufficiently long period, so only this
```

.. _random_numbers:

Randomness in NEST Simulations
==============================

Introduction
------------

Random numbers are used for a variety of purposes in neuronal network
simulations, e.g.,

1. during node creation to randomize node parameters;

#. during connection creation

   a. to select connections to be created,
   #. to parameterize connections;

#. during simulation

   a. to generate stochastic input (randomized spike trains, noisy currents),
   #. to support stochastic spike generation.

This document discusses how NEST provides random numbers for these
purposes, how you can choose which random number generator (RNG) to
use, and how to set the seed of RNGs in NEST. We use the term "random
number" here for ease of writing, even though we are always talking
about pseudorandom numbers generated by some algorithm.

> .. admonition:: NEST 3 vs NEST 2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. admonition::  NEST 2.x vs NEST 3.0
```

Reviewer 2: For consistency with other docs, I'd suggest using 3.0

   This document describes random number generators in NEST 3, which differs
   significantly from earlier versions. If you are working with NEST 2, please
   consult the documentation for NEST 2.

   Due to the significant changes in random number architecture between NEST 2
   and NEST 3, it is not possible to re-create NEST 2 simulations with identical
   random number sequences in NEST 3. Thus, spike patterns will differ in detail
   between simulations of the same model with NEST 2 and NEST 3, but shall agree
   as long as suitable quantities, such as firing rates, correlations, or spectra
   are compared across multiple simulations.

.. admonition:: Compiler dependency

>    NEST 3 uses random generators provided by the C++ Standard Library to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   NEST 3.0 uses random generators provided by the C++ Standard Library to
```

   obtain random deviates, i.e., random numbers following different distributions
   such as normal, binomial, or Poissonian. Different versions of the C++
   Standard Library use different algorithms to generate these deviates.
   Therefore, simulation results can differ in detail depending on the compiler
   and the C++ Standard Library implementation used. Note in particular that
   GCC and Clang come with different library implementations.

   As for the difference between NEST 2 and NEST 3, simulations based on
   different compilers/standard libraries shall agree as long as suitable
   quantities are compared using suitable statistical tests.

.. _working_with_rngs:

Working with randomness in NEST
-------------------------------

> NEST 3 makes randomness easy: Setting a single seed gives you full

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NEST 3.0 makes randomness easy: Setting a single seed gives you full
```

control over randomness throughout a simulation, and you can choose seed values

> at liberty. NEST's powerful mechanism to :ref:`parameterize nodes and synapses <REFERENCE NEEDED>`

Reviewer 3: Remember this reference!

Author: @heplesser Should it be `param_ex` for the section in the [NEST 2 to 3 guide](https://nest-simulator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/nest2_to_nest3/nest2_to_nest3_overview.html#parametrization), or `random_examples` for [the examples below in this guide](https://github.com/nest/nest-simulator/blob/5af666418730e3a0a7f7a1c0f717d19dd23a6434/doc/guides/random_numbers.rst#examples-of-using-randomness)?

in the technical details.

Selecting the type of random number generator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

NEST provides different random number generators, presently taken from the
C++ Standard Library and the `Random123 <https://www.deshawresearch.com/resources_random123.html>`__
library. To see all available generators, run

::

    nest.GetKernelStatus('rng_types')

This currently gives the following generators:

::

     'Philox_32', 'Philox_64',
     'Threefry_32', 'Threefry_64',
     'mt19937', 'mt19937_64'

The Philox and Threefry generators are cryptographic generators from Random123, while mt19937
is the `Mersenne Twister generator <http://www.math.sci.hiroshima-u.ac.jp/~m-mat/MT/emt.html>`__.
Each generator comes in a 32- and a 64-bit implementation. The number of bits has no consequence
for the quality of randomness, but depending on computer and compiler, one or the other may show
better performance. More generators may be added in the future. Currently, only a small number of
generators is available because we require generators with a sufficiently long period as discussed in
:ref:`Random number internals <random_internals>`.

> The default random number generator set in NEST 3 is ``mt19937_64``. To choose a different generator,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default random number generator set in NEST 3.0 is ``mt19937_64``. To choose a different generator,
```

:math:`2^{512} \sim 10^{154}` :math:`2^{-355} \sim 10^{-107}`
============================= ===============================

Thus, for generators with periods of at least :math:`2^{256}`, we have
negligible collision probability also under this tightened criterium.

Among the generators offered by the C++ Standard Library, only the
Mersenne Twister generator has a sufficiently long period, so only this
generator is included. The generators from the Random123 library are
cryptographic generators and thus no period.

Seeding parallel random number streams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In NEST 3, the user provides a single seed :math:`1 \leq S \leq 2^{31}-1` to initialize
all :math:`N_{\text{vp}}+2`  random number generators in a parallel simulation.
NEST uses a seed sequence  generator to derive seeds for the individual RNGs from
the user-provided seed :math:`S`.

Since ``std::seed_seq`` from the C++ Standard Library `has weaknesses <https://www.pcg-random.org/posts/cpp-seeding-surprises.html>`__,
we use `Melissa O'Neill's improved seed sequence generator <https://www.pcg-random.org/posts/simple-portable-cpp-seed-entropy.html>`__.

Further background
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For more background on the NEST 3 random number generation architecture,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more background on the NEST 3.0 random number generation architecture,
```
